We’re hiring for a new role: A jobs person. In this post I’ll describe what this role involves, what we’re looking for in candidates, and what to expect in our interview process. I’ll also share some background information about our business and some reasons you may or may not want to apply for this job.

The Recurse Center is an educational retreat and programming community based in New York City. People come from around the world to spend three months focusing on becoming better programmers in a self-directed, supportive, and energizing environment. Our goal is to build the best place to become a better programmer. We’ve been in operation since 2011 and have an alumni network of about 600 people.

We are free to attend, and we make money by recruiting. We work with employers ranging from small startups to public tech companies, and these companies pay us a fee when they hire our alumni.

Given our business model, you might assume that RC is a kind of jobs-training program or is otherwise focused on employment. In fact, the opposite is true: We go to great lengths to make sure that RC is not focused on jobs. We don’t run RC so we can recruit; we recruit so we can run RC. Additionally, we do not base our admissions decisions on whether someone wants or can get a job. We focus exclusively on getting the best people we can, regardless of whether they want jobs.

There are two closely related parts of this role. The first part is helping members of our community (called Recursers) who are open to new jobs find ones they’ll enjoy.  This involves a number of things, including:

The other half of this role is working with our partner companies to help them hire Recursers. This includes:

This is not an internal recruiting role. You won’t be doing hiring for RC itself, and this job doesn’t involve “sourcing” candidates (i.e., finding people and convincing them to interview), since you will only work with existing members of our community.

Every job has downsides, and this one is no exception. People usually learn about these things after they join a company, but we think it’s important to highlight them in advance:

Thankfully, we think this job has many more good things going for it:

Where (and whether) you’ve previously worked or gone to school isn’t important to us. The following, however, is important:

Additionally, it would be fantastic if you have a programming background or are familiar with the technology industry. The ideal candidate is someone who has programmed previously (either professionally or as a hobby) but who isn’t interested in working as a programmer. However, this isn’t a requirement, and we care much more that you have the characteristics listed above than any specific technical knowledge or experience in the industry.

This is not a good job for someone who’s interested in transitioning into a programming role.

As we’ve said previously, we think most interviews are poor proxies for the jobs they’re meant to screen for. This is why we try to make our interviews as much like the actual jobs we’re hiring for as possible.

Here’s the outline of the process:

Our on-site interviews will consist of a series of about four 30 to 60-minute discussions and mock working sessions. Each will be with one or two RC employees or alumni, and will be structured to be as similar to the actual work you’d be doing as possible. You’ll also get a chance to go to out to lunch or coffee with a few RC employees, and you’ll have lots of opportunities to ask us questions. Our goal is to give you an accurate impression of what the role entails and what our company is like so you too can assess whether we’re a good fit or not.

