This is part of our “Paper of the Week” series. For more info, check out our
introductory blog post.

This week’s paper is Out of the Tar
Pit by Ben Moseley and Peter Marks,
which was presented at
SPA2006.

Out of the Tar Pit was submitted by Hacker Schooler Pablo
Torres, who shared the following:

In Out of the Tar Pit, Moseley and Marks argue that the biggest source of
complexity in programs is mutable state, because keeping track of all possible
combinations of bits is unmanageable. They introduce the notions of essential
and incidental complexity, the former referring to details that are inherent to
a problem and the latter to those complications that arise due to a particular
solution one might attempt - for example, issues added by the programming
language in use.

They continue by comparing Object-Oriented Programming’s approach of breaking
state up into small, manageable pieces and providing controlled mutations with
Functional Programming’s solution of avoiding mutations altogether; they also
spend some time analyzing Logic Programming. They favor the simplicity of FP,
even though they admit that it takes discipline to achieve.

Finally, they offer recommendations on how to build systems that are easy to
reason about by using the tools provided by Functional Programming and
relational database modelling.

Here’s the abstract from the paper:

Complexity is the single major difficulty in the successful development of
large-scale software systems. Following Brooks we distinguish accidental from
essential difficulty, but disagree with his premise that most complexity
remaining in contemporary systems is essential. We identify common causes of
complexity and discuss general approaches which can be taken to eliminate them
where they are accidental in nature. To make things more concrete we then give
an outline for a potential complexity-minimizing approach based on functional
programming and Codd’s relational model of data.

Read Along is a way for you to participate in Paper of the Week. If you want
to take part, all you have to do is read the paper, make something small in
response (code or prose), and email
us
a link of what you make by noon Eastern Time next Monday.

Last week’s paper was The Chubby Lock Service for Loosely-Coupled
Distributed Systems. Here are the Read Along
submissions:

Happy reading!

