Treating people like adults is a core tenet of Hacker School. That’s because
trusting people to make good decisions for themselves is a huge part of
self-directed education. In the fall 2012 batch, we made two small, seemingly
innocuous changes to the structure of Hacker School that had the unintended
effect of not treating people like adults. The changes had a surprisingly
large, negative impact on Hacker School.  Here’s what happened and what we do
differently now.

The first change we made was giving each facilitator a group of Hacker
Schoolers to get to know over the course of the batch. We did this because we
wanted to develop a good mental model of each programmer at Hacker School, and
make sure no one slipped through the cracks. The outwardly visible changes were
minimal. Everyone got assigned to a morning checkin group with their
facilitator, and each facilitator met personally with each Hacker Schooler in
their checkin group around once a week.

In the previous batch, each facilitator had been assigned to one of our three
rooms, and Hacker Schoolers tended to go to the same room every day out of
habit. Checkin groups were large—nine or ten people to a group, two
groups per room, one facilitator per group—so this new arrangement felt
pretty similar.

The second change we made was suggested by Hacker Schoolers from the previous
batch. Since the beginning of Hacker School, we’d had a mandatory, large group
dinner every week. Twice in the summer 2012 batch, we experimented with
splitting up into smaller groups and going to restaurants for dinner as a
change of pace. Everyone seemed to like the smaller dinners because they were
more intimate. At the end of the batch, a number of people told us that we
should make all dinners small instead of large, so we decided to give it a
shot.

Both of these changes felt minor, but their side effects were largely negative
and they didn’t do a good job at accomplishing their goals.

Knowing that everyone had a facilitator assigned to them introduced a different
power dynamic and encouraged people to treat us like teachers and to not take
responsibility for their own learning. Checkins were delivered to facilitators
and felt a lot like reports on homework assignments (which we don’t have). A
lot of people didn’t believe checkins were valuable, so we had trouble
convincing everyone to show up to Hacker School on time. Our mental model of
everyone did get better, but the negative effects of the change far outweighed
the positive ones.

Assigned small group dinners felt like class trips and we felt like chaperones.
We would say things like “Is everyone here? OK, let’s go!” The class trip
dynamic extended to the dinners themselves: they didn’t feel like relaxed meals
between peers and weren’t the bonding experiences that we hoped they would be.

Since last fall, we’ve made changes to checkins and dinners to make sure that
we’re treating everyone at Hacker School like an adult.

Facilitators no longer have assigned Hacker Schoolers. Checkin groups are now
half the size and often don’t contain any facilitators. Hacker Schoolers are
responsible for structuring their checkins however they see fit. This means we
don’t have as good a mental model of every Hacker Schooler, but it turns out
that in an environment where everyone is responsible for their own education,
having a good, centralized mental model of each person is much less important
than we originally thought.

Dinners are now in one big group, not at restaurants, optional, and always
accompanied by a talk. Having large non-restaurant dinners eliminates the
chaperoning, making them optional trusts each person to decide whether or not
they should come, and having talks makes them worth coming to.

There’s also been a more fundamental change. Since last summer, it feels like
we’ve also become a happier organization. It’s impossible to prove the
connection, but I feel like it has a lot to do with running Hacker School in a
way that’s more in line with our values.

