RSVPs for our next Localhost talk are now open. Localhost is a series of monthly, NYC-based, free, public technical talks from members of the Recurse Center community.

To celebrate one year of Localhost, we’re trying a different format for our next talk: on August 21st from 7:00 to 9:00 pm, eight Recursers will give seven lightning talks about projects they worked on at RC, from ASL translators to landscape generators to adventures in implementing the Viola-Jones algorithm. The event will be hosted at AppNexus, our Localhost partner through the rest of 2018.

You can RSVP, check out the full list of speakers and talk subjects, and find details about the venue and schedule on the talk’s RSVP page.

The format of this talk will be a bit different than our past events. The talks will begin at 7:20 pm. Each talk will last for 5-6 minutes, and will be followed by a 2-minute break for set-up for the next speaker. We won’t have a dedicated Q&A session, and we’ll still ask that you not ask questions during the talk. There will be time to chat with presenters at the end of the evening.

Our September talk will follow the usual format (one 30 minute talk from a single speaker, with a dedicated Q&A afterward).

Unlike most RC events, Localhost talks are open to the public. We set aside a fixed number of seats for folks who aren’t members of our community at every talk. It’s been great meeting so many new folks at our Localhost talks!

We know that attending a batch of RC is a big commitment, and hope that Localhost talks are a way for people to get a taste of what the RC community is like (and maybe even apply for a batch afterwards!). This is even more true for this event: it will be very similar to our Thursday evening presentations. If you RSVP, please read about our social rules before the event.

We’ll open RSVPs and post details for future talks on our Localhost page and here on our blog. Follow us here and on Twitter for updates on when RSVPs open.

All guests of Recurse Center events are required to abide by our
code of conduct.

