RSVPs for our next Localhost talk are now open! Localhost is a series of monthly, NYC-based, free, public technical talks from members of the Recurse Center community.

Our speaker is Mindy Preston, an RC alum who will be giving a talk about how library operating systems allow application programmers to approach operating systems programming in a way that’s comprehensible, documentable, testable, and hackable with everyday tools on May 15th from 7:00 pm to 9:00 pm at AppNexus.

You can RSVP, read the abstract, and find more details about the venue and schedule on the talk’s RSVP page.

Mindy’s talk will be the first of many hosted at AppNexus, an internet technology company that powers the real-time sale and purchase of digital advertising. We’re grateful to AppNexus for agreeing to host the rest of our 2018 Localhost events in their space!

In addition to being one of our recruiting partners, AppNexus has adopted some of RC’s social norms, including our social rules. Later this spring we’ll be co-writing a blog post with them about building good engineering environments, and our partnership.

Localhost talks are 30-minutes long, and are followed by a dedicated Q&A session. There will be a two-minute break after the talk for folks who wish to leave. There are a few reasons we run talks this way:

Unlike most RC events, Localhost talks are open to the public. We set aside a fixed number of seats for folks who aren’t members of our community at every talk. It’s been great meeting so many new folks at our Localhost talks!

We know that attending a batch of RC is a big commitment, and hope that Localhost talks are a way for people to get a taste of what the RC community is like (and maybe even apply for a batch afterwards!). If you RSVP, please read about our social rules before the event.

We’ll open RSVPs and post details for future talks on our Localhost page and here on our blog. Follow us here and on Twitter for updates on when RSVPs open.

All guests of Recurse Center events are required to abide by our
code of conduct.

