This is part of our “Paper of the Week” series. For more info, check out our
introductory blog post.

This week’s paper is The Power of Two Random Choices: A Survey of Techniques
and
Results
by Michael Mitzenmacher, Andréa W.
Richa and Ramesh
Sitaraman. It was published
in 2001 as part of the book Handbook of Randomized Computing.

This week’s paper was submitted by Hacker School alum Dan Luu, who shared the following:

I like this paper because it’s a really simple idea that’s quite powerful and
generally applicable. It’s so simple I can even describe the key intuition in
my summary. If you randomly throw n balls into n bins, the maximum number
of balls in a single bin is approximately O(log n), with high probability.
But if you take two random choices and place the ball in the bin with fewer
balls, the maximum drops to O(log log n). The balls into bins model is a
natural fit for scheduling / load balancing, hashing, and a number of other
common problems. As a result, two random choices often turns out to be really
effective despite its simplicity.

It turns out this is also applicable to a wide variety of problems that don’t
obviously map to balls / bins, like circuit routing and random
graphs
(although applying it to things that aren’t “obviously” balls/bins problems
isn’t always simple).

This week’s paper doesn’t have an abstract, so here’s the introduction:

To motivate this survey, we begin with a simple problem that demonstrates a
powerful fundamental idea. Suppose that n balls are thrown into n bins,
with each ball choosing a bin independently and uniformly at random. Then the
maximum load, or the largest number of balls in any bin, is approximately log
n / log log n with high probability. Now suppose instead that the balls are
placed sequentially, and each ball is placed in the least loaded of d ≥ 2
bins chosen independently and uniformly at random. Azar, Broder, Karlin, and
Upfal showed that in this case, the maximum load is log log n / log d +
Θ(1) with high probability.

The important implication of this result is that even a small amount of choice
can lead to drastically different results in load balancing. Indeed, having
just two random choices (i.e., d = 2) yields a large reduction in the maximum
load over having one choice, while each additional choice beyond two decreases
the maximum load by just a constant factor. Over the past several years, there
has been a great deal of research investigating this phenomenon. The picture
that has emerged from this research is that the power of two choices is not
simply an artifact of the simple balls-and-bins model, but a general and robust
phenomenon applicable to a wide variety of situations. Indeed, this two-choice
paradigm continues to be applied and refined, and new results appear
frequently.

Read Along is a way for you to participate in Paper of the Week. If you want
to take part, all you have to do is read the paper, make something small in
response (code or prose), and email
us
a link to what you made by noon Eastern Time next Monday.

There weren’t any submissions for last week’s paper. We’re excited to get some good ones next week.

Happy reading!

