We’re excited to announce that Frank Wang, Allison Parrish, Raquel Vélez and Jonathan Edwards will be in residence at the Recurse Center this summer!

If you’d like to work with Frank, Allison, Raquel, Jonathan or residents like them, apply to the Recurse Center.

 Frank Wang will be in residence from 6/1 – 6/4. Frank is a PhD student at MIT focusing on building secure systems. He did his undergraduate at Stanford, focusing on applied cryptography. He runs the MIT security seminar where top academics come and talk about their most recent research. He is also a member of Roughdraft Ventures, which provides small amounts of capital to early stage student startups. He is currently running a summer program for early stage security companies called Cybersecurity Factory. He has interned at the security teams at Google and Facebook as well as consulted for security companies like Qualys. When he is not busy worrying about your security, he enjoys going to art museums and being outdoors.

 Allison Parrish will be in residence from 6/8 – 6/19. Allison is a computer programmer, poet, educator and game designer who lives in Brooklyn. Her teaching and practice address the unusual phenomena that blossom when language and computers meet. Allison is currently the Digital Creative Writer-in-Residence at Fordham University and an adjunct professor and “something-in-residence” at NYU’s Interactive Telecommunications Program, where she teaches a course on writing computer programs that generate poetry.

 Raquel Vélez will be in residence from 7/20 – 7/23. Raquel is a Senior Software Developer at npm, Inc. in Oakland, CA. She has previously worked at Caltech, NASA JPL, the MIT Lincoln Laboratory, and various universities in Europe. In her off time, you can find her baking, teaching NodeBots not to fall off of tables, and speaking. Also, hanging out with her hilarious husband and two cats dressed in dog suits.

 Jonathan Edwards will be in residence from 8/24 – 8/28. Jonathan has been programming for 45 years. He was cofounder and CTO of IntraNet, Inc. where he built a document-oriented transactional replicated database in the 80’s. He learned the most about programming by having to carry a beeper for 15 years. He is currently a Research Fellow at MIT CSAIL and a member of the Communications Design Group at SAP Labs. He blogs at alarmingdevelopment.org. He specializes in being tragically ahead of his time.

